good evening I'm
hari Sreenivasan Judy
Woodruff is away on
the NewsHour tonight
this is a repeal
and a replace of
Obamacare make no
mistake about it a new
prescription for
American health care
House Republicans
narrowly pass a bill
to overhaul the
Affordable Care Act also
ahead when the
economy leaves town we
visit Janesville
Wisconsin to hear what
happens after the
biggest employer shuts
its doors this is
a story of what
choices people made
when there were no
good choices left because it was
impossible to keep
your income and stay
working here Plus
refugees fleeing South
Sudan's civil war
pour into Uganda but
tensions break out
as the fight for
scarce resources
plagued overcrowded
villages the thought
the ban border is
just about a mile
down the road here
some 500 people
each day walk into
Uganda the first
evidence they'll have a
safe night to sleep
these white tents
here put up by the
United Nations all
that and more on
tonight's PBS news hour
[Music]
major funding for
the PBS newshour
has been provided
by BNSF Railway
and by the Alfred
P sloan Foundation
supporting science
technology and
improved economic
performance and
financial literacy
in the 21st century
[Music]
Carnegie Corporation of New York
supporting innovations
and education
democratic engagement and the
advancement of
international peace and
security at carnegie org
and with the ongoing
support of these
individuals and institutions
[Music]
this program was
made possible by the
Corporation for Public
Broadcasting and
by contributions
to your PBS station
from viewers like you
thank you
the White House and
House Republicans
are celebrating tonight
today they push through
a bill to remake
the health care
system something they
failed to do back in
March the vote was
217 to 213 Lisa
Desjardins begins our
coverage make no
mistake this is a
repeal and a replace
of Obamacare make
no mistake about it
make no mistake a
dramatic day ended at
the White House as
President Trump and
House Republicans
celebrated wrestling
out a hard-fought
first win in the fight
over the Affordable
Care Act we're going
to get this passed
through the Senate I
feel so confident as
much as we've come
up with a really
incredible health care
plan this has brought
the Republican
Party together just
an hour earlier the
Republicans American
Health Care Act
squeaked through
with a single vote to
spare as the vote count was read
supporters erupted
in cheers the bill is
passed and without
objection the motion
to reconsider is laid
upon the table 20
Republicans and every
Democrat voted no
Democrat who said
support of the bill
would cost Republicans
their seats
responded with taunts
of hey hey goodbye
it was the
culmination of days of
tension and hours of
heated debate House
Speaker Paul Ryan who
just six weeks ago
was forced to pull
an earlier version of
the bill made an
emotional plea a lot of
us have been waiting
seven years to cast
this vote are we going
to meet this test
are we going to be
men and women of our
word are we going
to keep the promises
that we made or are
we going to falter
no Democrats summoned emotion to
insisting the vote was rushed
short-sighted and
will hurt millions of
Americans does
Trump care protects
seniors and Families
does Trump care is
Trump care good for our veterans
is there any caring
and Trump care at
all just 24 hours
earlier a vote much
less passage was
uncertain in the end
enough conservatives
and a few moderate
to God on board to
put the bill over the
top how did Republicans
get those votes
two changes first
a rescue amendment
from New Jersey
Republican Tom McArthur
it allows states to waive out of
essential benefits
like hospital care
spending caps and requirements
surrounding
pre-existing conditions
states can only
drop those things if
they show it would
improve the market
that brought some
conservative votes but
raised other concerns
about people with
pre-existing
conditions the answer
another amendment
from michigan's fred
upton to add eight
billion dollars to a
one hundred and
fifteen billion dollar
pot of money states
can use to help the
highest risk patients
democrats today
called that amount
a pittance it is a
lie it is a lie
and let's be honest
about it this does
not cover people with
pre-existing conditions
and to come on
the floor and say it
does to try to fool
people well you may
get away with it in
the short term you
may get a headline
but I'll tell you
people will figure out
soon enough Republicans
counter charging
their opponents
were ill-informed I
believe probably the
reason they won't
vote for it is they
don't understand it
because pre-existing
conditions are
covered if you have
coverage now nothing
in our bill no matter
what would come
from the state or
anyone else would lose
the pre-existing
conditions there's
multiple but I guess
it's just easier to
talk you're talking
point the bill would
have sweeping other
effects repealing
Obamacare taxes and
adding tax credits
of a few thousand
dollars based on age
and income but the
most dramatic changes
may be to Medicaid
the bill would cap
benefits and phase
out the expansion for
estimated cuts of
eight hundred and
eighty billion
dollars over a decade
that's one reason
the Congressional
Budget Office concluded
it would mean 24
million more
uninsured Americans as
House members debated
the measure inside
the Capitol protesters
gathered outside
the bill now goes to
the Senate where it
faces an extensive
potential makeover
and concerns from
members of both
parties as for House
Republicans they
left the Capitol
and mass with smiles
headed to a one-week
recess Lisa will be
back as we explore
the politics in
particulars of the
Republican bill after
the news summary in
the day's other news
the Senate approved
1.1 trillion dollar
spending bill to
keep the government
running through
September it had
already passed the
House the Senate vote
sends the bill to
president Trump
there's more defense
spending as he wanted
but no funding for
the promised border
wall there's where
the Trump administration
is talking with
Iraq about having US
troops stay longer
some 7,000 are
deployed there now
reports today say
prime minister haider
al-abadi wants some
or all of them to
remain even after
Islamic state forces
are defeated Russia
Turkey and Iran
agreed today to
establish for non
conflict zones in
Syria representatives
of the three nations
signed an agreement
at peace talks in
Kazakhstan some Syrian
opposition delegates
protested and
walked out Russia
Turkey and Iran worked
out a Syrian ceasefire
deal in December
but it collapsed
after a few weeks
president Trump
signed an executive
order today to let
churches be more
politically active
the White House said
it eases enforcement of a ban on
tax-exempt religious groups
participating in politics and it
mandates unspecified
regulatory relief
for groups citing
religious objections
against covering
contraception for
employees in a White
House rose garden
ceremony the president said he's
reaffirming a
commitment to freedom of
religion for too
long the federal
government has used
the power of the
state as a weapon
against people of
faith bullying
and even punishing
Americans for following
their religious
beliefs it's been
happening that is why
I am signing today
an executive order to
defend the freedom
of religion and
speech in America
the American Civil
Liberties Union
said later that the
order does not
actually change much of
anything so the group
will not bother to
challenge it in court
the president is
back in New York
this evening for the
first time since
his inauguration
hundreds of protesters
turned out as he
met with the Prime
Minister of Australia
before speaking at
the USS Intrepid a
decommissioned
aircraft carrier the
White House also
announced he'll travel
to Saudi Arabia
Israel and the Vatican
this month his first
overseas trip as
president concludes
at a NATO summit in
Belgium former
President Obama has
weighed in on the frame
presidential
election he endorsed
centrist Emmanuel
macron overfall right
candidate marine
lepen in a video
message posted
today on mackerels
Twitter account I
have admired the
campaign that Emmanuel
macron has run he
has stood up for
liberal values he put
forward a vision for
the important role
that France plays
in Europe and around
the world and he
is committed to a
better future for
the French people he
appeals to people's
hopes and not their
fears polls suggest
mackerel is well
ahead in Sunday's
runoff vote the
Governor of Puerto
Rico is vowing no new
taxes and no new
austerity measures as
the territory seeks
debt relief puerto
rico filed wednesday
to restructure part
of the seventy three
billion dollars in
OS today governor
ricardo Rosello said
he'll negotiate with
creditors but he
insisted quote I
am NOT going down a
road that would
force the people of
Puerto Rico to make
more sacrifices and
on Wall Street energy
stocks sank and
canceled out gains
elsewhere the Dow
Jones Industrial
Average lost six points
it goes to 20,000
951 the Nasdaq rose
two points and the
S&P 500 added just
one point still to
come on the news hour
how the health care
bill is likely to
fare in the Senate
the top Democrat on
the House Intelligence
Committee about
the latest in the
Russia investigation
making sense of
Janesville Wisconsin's
complicated economic
recovery and much
more
[Music]
let's dive a little
deeper into the bill
passed by the house
what it would change
when it comes to
coverage and cost and
the politics moving
forward our own Lisa
de Chardin joins us
for that just back
from Capitol Hill
and Julie Rovner is
with kaiser Health
News Lisa let's start
with pre-existing
conditions that became
the phrase that pays
all week long and
even today who's
going to get left out
of this it's a very
serious concern
according to Kaiser
Family Foundation is
Julie talked about
more in a second some
52 million Americans
have pre-existing
conditions adults
and could have their
insurance affected
the way this works
hari is that each
state would decide if
they want a waiver so that their
insurers could opt out of the
pre-existing
protections as they're
called now Republicans
say that this
should not affect those with
pre-existing conditions
because if their
premiums get too
high they've created
what's called high-risk
pools they say
that will help them
but I spent a lot of
time talking to
Republicans about this
today they do not
guarantee that your
premium won't go up if you have
pre-existing
conditions insurers can
raise those premiums
the question is
will states actually
opt in to do this
and also important
hurry it's easy to
get these waivers
under this particular
version because if
the state applies for
it if the government
does nothing it
happens the government
has to actually
block the waiver so
a lot of this seems
to depend on a
state-by-state basis on
who decides to continue
well absolutely
you know this is one
of the things that
the Republicans
said they don't like
that health care
is being you know
basically governed
from the federal
government they want
to turn it back to
the states now we
should say that states
already have a lot
of power in the
insurance market
they do they still
regulate individual
insurance they still
regulate insurance
for small businesses
into businesses that
operate in multiple
states are regulated
by the federal
government but that wasn't the
Affordable Care Act
that's been the case
one of the things
that the Republicans
have said is are one
of our methods to
deal with this is creating these
high-risk pools let's
talk a little bit
about that how
would they work well
basically the 35
states used to have
these high-risk pools
and these are for
people who have very expensive
conditions within an
ongoing normally at
an ongoing problem
and they basically
get shunted off into
a different pool
that's why they're
called high-risk
pools and
the reason for that is that the
healthier people
in the regular pool
would then have lower
premiums because
they're not paying
for those expensive
people does that
mean that the sicker
people have higher
premiums that's
exactly correct the
sicker people have
could get insurance
but they had higher
premiums sometimes
they had they had
pre-existing condition
exclusion so you
couldn't get coverage
for the very thing
that got you into
the high-risk pool
sometimes for up to
a year and also a
lot of the more
underfunded so they
would close to do
entrance there was a
pool in Florida
that was closed for
decades
Lisa and that's where
this money comes
in that Republicans added to the
last-minute billion
dollars that could
go to these high-risk
pools to try and
help stabilize those
premiums but we
have no idea if
that's enough money
there is not a CBO
score on this bill we
don't know there's
not a CBO score for
how much is needed
in that kind of
national potential
high-risk pool it's a
huge question mark
there are many people
who say eight billion
dollars is not
going to cut it we've tried to
supplement these
high-risk pools in the
past few years and
it's come up short
there was a federal
high-risk pool as in
the transition to
the affordable care
act and it closed
I think more than a
year early because
it ran out of money
okay let's talk a
little bit about the
essential health
benefits that's also
something that's
been too discussed on
something that could
really strain the
average household of
the average family
first to set the
table what are some of
the essential health
benefits that have
been guaranteed
under the Affordable
Care Act that are
under threat now sort
of an unseen skeleton
of American health
care we're talking
about things like
hospital care being
able to go to a
hospital emergency
care the ER maternity
care preventive
care that could be
anything from cancer
screenings to right
now contraception
depending on how the
health health agency
goes forward it is
it also prescription
drugs ten basics
that the Congress
under Obama care said
must be in every
plan now the way
Republicans in the
House want it they
want States to be
able to waive out of
those essential
benefits now you're
creating a market
state-by-state basis
saying I'm going to
have an essential
health package that's
different from my
neighboring state
right so this is one
of the things that Donald Trump
confidently said
today that we're going
to drive down premiums
we're going to
drive down these costs
is it likely that
states will start
to offer up these
different packages
for employers from
other places
well actually already
States get to pick
which you know kind
of there to call to
benchmark plan it
does have to have
those benefits but
states can decide on
a state-by-state
basis what the plan
should be modeled as
what this is saying
is that it would
give insurers the
ability to just
jettison some of those
benefits now they
probably wouldn't
jettison hospital
care and doctor care
but they might you
know say we're not
going to cover
maternity care we're not
going to cover mental
health care we're
only going to cover
generic prescription
drugs and not
brand-name prescription
drugs so then probably
premiums would go
down but people who
needed that coverage
wouldn't have it
any more what people
would be making that
choice Republicans
argue they say you
could choose to have
a bare-bones
plan instead of a
Cadillac that's right
one of the biggest
numbers in this 880
billion dollars in
cuts to Medicaid how
does that go forward
this is really sort
of that has been
hidden in the debate
this is a tremendous
change to Medicaid
for the first time
since Medicaid was
created in 1965 there
would no longer be
open-ended federal
funding and we're not
just talking about the Medicaid
expansion that was
in the Affordable
Care Act that would
be phased down we're
talking about the
basic Medicaid program
that pays for maternity care and
childbirth for almost
half the children
born in the United
States and the
majority of nursing
home care so that's
where the the
Congressional Budget
Office suggested
that much of the
declining coverage
would come from were
states losing money
for Medicaid when
you look at the
politics of this as
there are senators and there are
governors who are
not in favor this
that's right and I
think we're going to
pay a lot more
attention to send it now
they have a real
problem in the Senate
and in fact you talk
to some senators
have been around a
long time including
the chairman of the
Health Committee
that helped committee
as it's called
Alexander his office
and sent me an
email tonight he says
that the Senate is
going to write its
own bill they're
going to start and go their own
direction Medicaid
is a big problem and
states with some of
the highest Medicaid
rates are also states
with Republican
senators they are taking it very
seriously
also hari today nine of those
Republicans who
voted no on this bill
had districts where
Hillary Clinton won
the presidential
election so there are
real issues for 2018
here and one of the
things that we're
also hearing today is
that this could
affect people who are
not in need of the
Affordable Care Act
or a government
plan people who have
private insurance through their
employers which
is the bulk of the
population that's
right and you know
this is a very
good example of how
complicated this all
is these things are
tied to each other when
you pull one piece
of it out you could
inadvertently touch
another piece this
is an example the
Wall Street Journal
this morning reported
that that people
who have now insurers
or our employers
are required not to
offer coverage that
has lifetime limits
that say if once you
have a million
dollars in claims you
can't do it anymore
you can't cover
anymore it's tied
to those essential
health benefits so
if the essential
health benefits go
away then once again
employer coverage
could have lifetime
limits all right
Julie Robert Lisa
t-shirt and thank
you both thank you to
help you keep track
of the many details
we have a guide to
the GOP health care
bill on our website
that's pbs.org slash
Newshour
[Music]
there are at least three major
investigations
underway into what role
Russia played in
the presidential
election and whether
the Trump campaign
colluded in that
process today two of
the nation's top
national security
officials held a
closed hearing with
congressional
investigators william
brangham has more the
House Intelligence
Committee is one of
those investigative
bodies looking into
Russia's role in the
election and today
the director of the
FBI James Comey and
NSA Mike Rogers brief
that Committee on
Capitol Hill joining
me now is the top
Democrat on that committee
representative Adam Schiff from
California congressman
I can hear in the
background there
are some protesters
there I take it
protesting the the gops
passage of their
health law we'll talk
about that in a minute
but before we get
to that I'd like to
talk a little bit
about this hearing
today you heard from
the head of the NSA
the head of the FBI
I know this was a confidential
closed-door hearing
can you share a
little bit of us with
us about what you
heard today certainly
well I can't go
into the contents I
can't tell you the
three areas of focus
for us and that is
we have this very
public assessment by
the Intelligence
Committee community
rather that the
Russians intervened they
did so to hurt Secretary
Clinton to help
Donald Trump and we
are investigating to
make sure that the
conclusions reached
in that report are an accurate
reflection of the
raw intelligence we
also want to look
at the US government
response did the FBI
for example bring
the necessary urgency
to the task when
it discovered the
Russians were into
computers at the
Democratic National
Committee and elsewhere
and then finally
in a probably most
public interest we
continue to investigate
the issue of
whether there were
US persons particular
those involved in
the Trump campaign
that were somehow colluding or
coordinating with
this Russian hacking
into our democracy yesterday FBI
director Comey
testified before the
Senate and he gave
a very impassioned
testimony arguing
that his investigation
both of Hillary
Clinton's email server
and of the Russia
investigation was
absolutely fair and
he argues he would
do it exactly
the same way again
are you confident
from what you heard
yesterday and what
you heard today that
that director Comey
is the right man for
this investigation
well I have serious
questions about the
directors testimony
yesterday I disagree
strongly with the
conclusions and the
argument that he
was making I don't
think it was at all
a choice between
speaking or concealing
and the fact the
director used such
a loaded term like
conceal I think really
demonstrated the
weakness frankly of
that argument the
real choice was
whether he would abide
by the Department
of Justice policy of
not discussing
pending matters right
before an election
he violated that
policy and he also
treated the Clinton
investigation and the Trump
investigation in very
different ways and
I don't think his
argument that one
investigation was
in the early stage
that he disclosed the Clinton
investigation only
three months after
had begun and somehow
it was different
for the Trump
investigation holds up
after all
in October the Trump
investigation by
his own accounting
had also been going
on for three months
so I don't agree
with what he said
yesterday at the same
time in terms of going
forward I have to
hope that he will do a thorough
investigation of
these allegations
concerning the Trump
campaign we for our
part are determined
to follow the facts
wherever they lead
and we're going to
have to expect
him to do the same
congressman a few
months ago you said
that there was more
than that there was
a good bit of evidence
that there had
been collusion by
the Trump campaign
later you seemed
to indicate that
perhaps that wasn't
as clear is there
anything more you
can tell us today
about the evidence
that does or doesn't
exist about collusion
between the Trump
campaign and the
Russians well what I
have said is that I
think the evidence
of coordination
reclusion is not purely
circumstantial
unfortunately I'm not
able to go into the
particulars of the
evidence but I
thought it fair to
characterize at
least initially where
we're starting out
in the investigation
I do think that the
FBI was justified an
opening investigation
last year I think
that's not something
when it involves a
major presidential
campaign that they do
willy-nilly and I think they're
justified in continuing that in
sedation but
unfortunately I can't go
into the particular
x' let's turn to
obviously that big
ruckus that we hear
behind you
a huge piece of news
today that the GOP
was successful in
passing their piece of
healthcare legislation
what was your I
know you voted against
it what was your
reaction to what happened today
well my pedometer
reaction is it's a sad
day I think for this
institution when we
would vote and
effectively cut off
millions of people
from access to health
care and when you
have the kind of
massive cuts to
Medicaid that are in
this bill when
you're essentially
telling states they
can do away with
protections for people who have
pre-existing health
conditions you're
voting for legislation
that you know or
should know will mean
that millions will
lose their access
to health care we
ought to be sad about
it I don't think
the Republicans should
be celebrating at
the White House about
it and I will say
this too it's not
that this is some
abstract desire to
cut people off from
health care the real
motivating force
behind my GOP
colleagues and the vote
today is they want
to take the money out
of the health care
system and they want
to give it out in
the form of a tax cut
that will benefit
predominantly wealthy
people that's the
tragedy of what we did
today and I don't
think it's going to
pass muster in the
Senate I think that
celebration will be
short-lived and for
good reason
lastly congressman
the president seemed
to indicate today
at the White House
that Obamacare was
dead do you believe
that's true
no I don't believe
that at all and what
we have seen throughout
the country is
states that have
wanted to make it
successful like my
own home state of
California have and
millions more people
are now covered by insurance the
marketplaces work
reasonably well not
perfect and we can
still improve it but
in other states where
they wanted it to
fail willed it to
fail try to deter
people from enrolling
they have largely
succeeded in doing
that the president
for his part is also
determined to try
to bring down the
affordable care act
that's why they have
cut off outreach to
young people they
want only older sicker
people to enroll and
to raise costs so
they can make the
case for a repeal it's
a cynical strategy I
think at the end of
the day the Republicans
won't be able
to do this on their
own and shouldn't
and I hope it'll get
us to a place where
we can work together
on a bipartisan
basis to improve the
existing system and
not do away with
in favor of cutting
millions of people
off from health care
all right representative
Adam Schiff
thank you very much thank you
[Music]
stay with us coming
up on the news hour
refugees fleeing
the world's youngest
country now ravaged
by civil war the
summer movies you
don't want to miss and
a brief but
spectacular take from
legendary television
writer and producer
Norman Lear
but first the story
of what happened to
Janesville Wisconsin
after its biggest
employer shut down
it's the hometown of
House Speaker Paul
Ryan economics
correspondent Paul
Solman reports it's
part of a series
making sense which airs
Thursdays on the
NewsHour at Janesville
Wisconsin's Parker
High School there's a
room that's unmarked
and usually closed
so the Parker closet
is a resource area
for students that are struggling
financially and so we offer food
toiletries clothing
school supplies all
free all donated a
larger for the hungry
begun surreptitiously
by teacher Derry
Eastman in 2008 when this proud
industrial town of
63,000 was knocked
for a loop
General Motors
titled the Janesville
assembly plant for
nearly a century the
area's largest
employer this is the
oldest operating
General Motors plant in
the United States
going to shut down
journalist Aimee
Goldstein in 1919 it
started making
tractors and in 1923 it
began turning out
Chevrolet trucks
[Music]
for decades thereafter
a job at the
plant was a ticket
to the middle class
Dave Vaughn went to
the plant straight
from high school
retired after 35 years
when I hired in
ins 1967 there were
approximately 7,200
people that worked
there it was like a small city
it was security it
was good benefits
I had a vested pension
even by the time
the last Chevy
Tahoe rolled off the
assembly line there
were still 1,200
workers making $28
an hour all laid off
along with thousands
of others at local
GM suppliers I knew
a lot of the people
down there families
friends neighbors
that's a lot of
people in one little
city of Janesville
the one son and
daughter-in-law both
lost their jobs at
leer which made seats
for GM vehicles I
was shocked and
then I guess I was
scared what's next
all of a sudden we're
both unemployed
financially what are we
going to do Mike
Vaughn's wife Barb felt
the same even though
the job had taken
quite a toll on her
I was working with
bolts about that big
around in that long
um torquing them
into the seat I had
surgery on my shoulder
and then I ended
up with a surgery
on my wrist so some
relief for barb
none at all for Mike
at the time I was
the Labour leader
for almost 900 people
and ultimately I
had to be a part of
giving the news
that the plant is
closing what was the
process line they
were angry they
were upset they were
hurt and they were
scared it was shortly
after this the dairy
Eastman started
slipping day-to-day
essentialist of
formerly middle
class students now
struggling stressed and often
embarrassed some of
the kids were wow I
can't believe this
all is in here and
someone would be
very open to taking
things others would
be like nope we're
okay about 250 kids
made use of the
closet including two
brothers who asked
for soap
and shampoo after
their mother's day
care business went bust
well when the plant
closed the parents
were home they
didn't need a daycare
anymore and so
Carey's daycare center
kind of washed up and I remember
realizing this was
going to be a huge
ripple effect for
Jamesville in all the
region lost some 9,000 jobs ami
Goldstein's book
janesville an american
story is about what
came next this is a
story of what choices
people made when
there were no good
choices left because
it was impossible
to keep your income
and stay working here
some people chose
to stay here and
make less money and
some of the gmos
chose to work farther
away and keep up the
standard of living
thus the term GM
gypsies workers who
accepted a transfer
to other GM plants
hundreds of miles
away good morning
transferees how many
all this first move
you've ever made there will be
difficulties I'm
living experience of it
I've got one failed
marriage behind me
Indiana was the
closest place you could
work in Lordstown
Ohio so these families
were very split up
into this day some of
the families are
still split up with
workers coming home
depending on how far
away they are once
a week once a month
but other workers
took the path so often
pushed and D
industrializing America
these last few decades
stay in town and
go back to school
for retraining in
Janesville at highly
respected Blackhawk
Technical College
tuition paid by the
federal government
it was here that the
Vaughn strained to
reinvent themselves
it was obviously
scary it was something
that was unchartered
and unknown Mike
stuck it out and
finished an associate's
degree in human
resource management
because I had been
unemployed and I took
the first job that
was offered to me
which was a second shift
Human Resources
position at Seneca Foods
Corporation what was
the difference in
pay it was a lot less
pay yep a lot less
pain barb long ashamed
that she dropped
out of high school
we got her diploma and then a
criminal-justice
associate's degree and
after that her
bachelor's I can't even
describe how focused
she was I couldn't
have anything less
than a 4.0 she
couldn't she was a
perfectionist she had
to have straight A's
I received an a-minus
and it just threw
me for a loop she
was angry she was
angry I thought
something really bad
might have happened
and she got an
a-minus and I was
thinking that's not
bad that's pretty
good you know the
Vaughn's are success
stories Mike has
worked his way back
up to the salary he
earned it Lear both
have found new work
they like locally
but they turn out to
be stunning exceptions
fully two-thirds
of those who went to
Blackhawk Technical
College never
finished this was a
heartbreaking thing
that I heard over
and over from some
of the people who
work at the college
that people started
a course but they
needed to grab any job
they could because
they just didn't have
the money but even
more heartbreaking
the minority who did
get a degree fared
worse than those who
did not the people
who we trained ended
up less likely to
have steady work they
have bigger drops
in their wages
than the people who
hadn't gone back
to school so the
question is why you
know it's possible
that those few jobs
that were round in
the community were
absorbed by the
people who didn't be
trained so that if
you were retraining
you were you were
stepping out of
line exactly another
possibility is that if you were
successful at retraining
and you managed
to shift into a new
line of work it's
very likely that
you were starting at
the bottom of the
ladder but whatever
the reasons job
retraining one of the
precious few economic
policies pretty
much everyone lodz
simply fizzled I've
seen a lot of people that are
potentially still
struggling or not
where they may have
wanted to been as a
result of the
restraining if there's no
jobs available after
retraining now what
do you do in the
years since the plant
left there's been a
big push to attract
new businesses to Janesville
even Janesville
native Paul Ryan has
courted potential
employers to the area
so will the town
come back there are
some jobs that have
come back there
aren't the kind of
job that used to be
here I mean the
unemployment rate here
in early 2009 rocketed
up to more than
13% it's now down
to just under five
percent so if you
look just at that
number you can say
this community has
really come back
rebounded just as
America just as
America has but if you
look at other things it's a more
complicated picture
manufacturing jobs
have not come back
and in terms of real
wages factoring
inflation to account
this area is running
behind where it was
in 2008 so people
are working again but
they're not working
making the kind of
money they were before
which may explain
why dairy Eastman
still has almost two
hundred students using
the Parker closet
for the PBS news hour
this is economics
correspondent Paul
Solman reporting from
Janesville Wisconsin
on our making sense
page we have an
excerpt from the book
Janesville an
American story about a
struggling teenager
who discovered the
Parker closet after
her father lost his
job at General Motors
that's at pbs.org
slash Newshour
[Music]
this week we brought
you three reports
from inside South
Sudan a nation ravaged
by war famine and a
place where rape is
used as a weapon
tonight we turn our
focus in neighboring
Uganda which has an
open door to refugees
but with hundreds
sometimes thousands
pouring across the
border each day
Uganda's openness is
being put to a test special
correspondent Fred
de Sam Lazaro reports
on a recent afternoon
refugees from
South Sudan sang
songs of praise and
thanks these are
the newest arrivals
from the brutal civil
war in their young
country the South
Sudan border is just
about a mile down the
road here some 500
people each day walk
into Uganda there's
no sign indicating
they've arrived the
first evidence they'll
have a safe night
to sleep
these white tents
here is put up by the
United Nations water
is provided but no
food that will have
to wait for at least
another day when
they reach settlement
centers to be
registered some people
told us they hadn't
eaten for days these
women arrived after
a five-day walk
through the bush
found an open spot on
the floor and
quickly collapsed in
complete exhaustion
some refugees tell
harrowing stories
about violence they've
seen much of it
ethnically based they
think as it is killing
us yeah they're
killing their coat
areas so they're
killing you just
because you are not a
hunka yes nearly
600,000 refugees have
entered Uganda
since July when new
fighting from the
Civil War erupted and
the flow continues
unabated biddie
biddie the world's
largest refugee
settlement with
300,000 residents about
the size of Pittsburgh
was closed to new
arrivals in December to prevent
overcrowding in bepi
about 30 miles from
the border was
opened two months ago
already 62,000 people
have moved in a
number expected to reach the 110
thousand capacity
by late May or June
the overwhelming
numbers uh straining
relief efforts people
wait in line for
hours
occasionally days
just to get registered
and tensions are
rising between the
newcomers and
Ugandan from nearby
communities is it
take care of losses
yeah we arrived it
in Beppu shortly
after a skirmish
broke out between
refugees and locals
this young refugee
was bloodied and
eventually taken away
by an ambulance we'll
take care of the
blue a Hmong is field
director for the
UN High Commission
for Refugees at in VP
so is that a concern for you the
tensions between the
local communities
and the refugees yes
we have seen some
tensions a riot
of the people the
cultures are valid there needs
protection root
issues we have seen
large number of
children warming and a
single young boys
young goes they need a
protection they need
a safe space desk
so they can able to
go school they can
able to do their
basic arise in the
settlement area
such hostility is
relatively new in
a country whose
official policy has
been to integrate
refugees it looks
like any other African
village rather than
a refugee camp and
that's the point
Uganda's open-door
policy insists that
refugees be placed
in settlements and
not camps
acknowledging that most
families will stay
for some time they're
given a small plot
of land that they can
start to cultivate build a small
dwelling on it and
they're free to seek
opportunities
anywhere else in the
country as a people
have suffered before
we do not think
we should shut out
anybody
who's running away
for security Shaban
Van Teresa is a
spokesman for the
Ugandan government
he says his country
was itself once an
exporter of refugees
when it was wracked
for years by war
Uganda will continue to
provide what it
can he says but the
anger expressed
by some Ugandan is
understandable they
feel disadvantaged
and they have expressed
that they feel
that their inability
to get sufficient
drugs their inability
to Toto to have
enough food is the
because of the influx
of refugees
actually you'll feel
agitated but were
being Trento to to
work on that at the
settlements food is
still available to
the newest arrivals
but rations have
been cut in half for
people who've been
here for several
weeks water must be
trucked in at huge
expense the onslaught
has been so abrupt
there hasn't been
time to survey land
and drill wells
for clean water the
rationing of food
was apparent when we
talked with James
Ken he and his family
of seven walked for
three weeks to reach
the safety of Uganda
they now live in
this tent constructed
of tarps five of
us alone he's grateful
for the welcome
he's received but
says there isn't
enough food to go
around you run out
sometimes I run
computer even now as you
have seen there's
nothing on fire
there's nothing
cooking today yeah so
what will the children
need today then I
had to come and see
some other solution
wagon borrow from the neighbors
apparently the
neighbors did help with
this maize flour
for the next family
meal
the UN estimates
it will cost 840
million dollars to
deal with the refugee
crisis in Uganda this
year but El Cadiz
the loom of the UN's
World Food Program
says agencies like
his are facing a
severe shortfall we
are only 40 percent
of what we need we
appreciate all the
support we have
received from our donors
so far but we appeal
to all the donors
that they need to
increase their pledges
to us and to other
actors so that we
address especially
the life-saving needs
for the refugees or
in de settlements
the government and
UN officials say
things are approaching
a breaking point
the strain is definite
no doubt about
that
and that's why we try to engage
everybody in and out of Uganda
international
community they refused
cannot be this was
beautiful Uganda Iran
it's a global responsibility
responsibility
ultimately of course the
Ugandan government
and the refugees say
the solution is
for conditions to
stabilize in South
Sudan so refugees can
return that certainly
the hope of James
can so you could
live here for a long
time forever unless
when we go back to
Sasha I won't just
come back do you
think peace will ever
come back to South
Sudan well we did
not what he does know
is a strong sense of
deja vu the 32 year
old can actually
came to Uganda as a
child fleeing earlier
strife he returned
to South Sudan 12
years ago when peace
arrived only to flee
again just weeks
ago now he fears it could take a
generation in his
family and thousands
of others to make
the trek back for the
PBS Newshour I'm
fred de sam lazaro at
the invetory fuji
settlement in northern
uganda
Fred's reporting is
a partnership with
the under-told
stories project at the
University of st.
Thomas in Minnesota
and you can watch
all of our stories
from inside South
Sudan on our website
at pbs.org slash Newshour
it's only the
beginning of May but
believe it or not
the summer movie
season is upon us
and kicks into high
gear tomorrow with
the release of a big
sequel Jeffrey Brown
takes a look at the
business model that's
driving Hollywood
it's a tried and
true formula the
Hollywood Studios
bet on each summer
bring on a heavy
dose of aliens add a
group of charged up
superheroes throw in
a few launching
comedies on vacation in
with your boyfriend
no I'm just here
with them my mom
plus some kid flicks
and make sure
there are plenty of
explosions what's
changing is how the
summer season begins
ever earlier hope
you're ready it'll
be here in this
weekend features the
release of one of
the bigger sequels
of the year guardians
of the galaxy vol 2
the first movie was
something of a
surprise in grossing
nearly eight hundred
million dollars
worldwide a mix
of special-effects
action and comedy
and based on a comic
book producers say
they're looking to
tap into mass appeal
once again I think
audiences are going
to love first off
many of the things
they love from the
first movie the
humor the action the
scope the characters
what are we even
talking about this
for I think the key
to keeping these
movies fresh is being
able to give the
audience a new story
that nobody expects
yet totally in line
totally with what
audiences responded to
from before work
she's stupid raccoon
don't call her aku
the new guardians is
expected to make a
lot of money far more
than the 200 million
dollars spent on it
but not all of the
blockbusters will
many compete within
days of each other
sometimes even on
the same opening
weekend yet the studios
are dependent on
the summer season
it accounts for more
than four and a half
billion dollars in
box office sales
worldwide this year
we'll see at least
15 sequels reboots or
spin-offs between May and August
including the
much-anticipated Wonder
Woman many of the
films come from older
franchises that
includes spider-man
Planet of the Apes
you had another sequel
to the Pirates of
the Caribbean series
which began 13
years ago this is
weaved well they also
find a human vegetation
this far from
Earth and there's
one more follow-up to
the aliens franchise
the first movie in
that series opened
in 1979 an early
start to summer
the film industry's
blockbuster strategy
and a few of the
movies themselves
we talk about it now
with two film critics
and Hornaday of
the Washington Post
in Alonso Durrell
day of the rap comm
Alonso guardians of
the galaxy vol 2 I
didn't realize it was
summer yet but
apparently it is for the
studio's well you
know I think the the
studios are all making
summer movies all
year round now it's
kind of like being
the Hallmark Channel
they make 27 new
Christmas movies a year
so they have to start
showing them the
weekend before
Halloween if all the
studio's make are giant colorful
explosion filled movies for mass
audiences then all
year has to become
summer so and some
are all year-round
why has the season
expanded and how much
is this blockbuster
model running
Hollywood well the
blockbuster model is
definitely the
dominant business model
although you know
other alternative
business models have
emerged as sort of
a counterweight
like the Oscar award
season business model
but definitely the
blockbuster tentpole
model is huge it
sort of started out
as a strategy to
attract teenagers
especially teenage
boys to the theaters
now it's really a
way to get foreign
audiences I mean the
foreign foreign
revenues and markets
emerging markets are
hugely important so
these sorts of movies
travel very well
because they don't they're not
necessarily as
dependent on subtitling
and cultural
understandings and sort of
cultural translation
and in terms of
just the expansion
of the year I mean
since everybody
was so desperately
focused on the summer to kind of
capitalize on vacation
and people being
out of school and
repeat business
they've discovered
that they can go
where the other ones
aren't and maybe
make a buck and I
think Disney has
really proven this
out with their
strategy of bringing out their
live-action
adaptations of animated
classics like
Cinderella and just this
year Beauty and
the Beast and when
they've kind of
taken over that March
slot and and really
done quite well with
it so Alonso I mean
what do you make of
this blockbuster
model because you look
at $100 100 million
dollar films 200
million dollar films
they clearly can't
and don't make it
there's always flops
how does it work well
you know the idea
is that audiences
want to see something
they're familiar with
they want you know
intellectual
properties they've seen
before whether it's
a sequel or a remake
or an adaptation of
a Saturday morning
cartoon and a lot
of those movies do
make money but it
doesn't always work we
had some big flop
sequels last summer
the the Independence
Day sequel for one
was a big red ink
Spiller but they would
much rather spend
a lot of money on
something they think
is familiar than to
gamble on something
completely unknown
so let me ask both
of you an you can
start which of
which movies are you
looking forward to
either because you
hope they're going
to be good or because
it tells you something
about the movie
business itself that
you're that you're
watching so carefully
well I mean I'm
very curious about
Wonder Woman I mean I
was one of those many
critics last year
that were very
disappointed with Batman
vs Superman and
Suicide Squad I haven't
been I haven't been
over the moon about
the way Warner Brothers
has handled the
DC franchise and
especially the Superman
storylines so I'm
really looking forward
to Wonder Woman in
terms of another big
movie my very curious
about Christopher
Nolan's Dunkirk
he's done this huge
spectacle about
the evacuation of
Dunkirk it's always
interesting to see
what Christopher
Nolan is up to because
he's a real cinematic
purist and so I
think putting him
together with history
and spectacle should yield some
interesting results
Alonso start with
the big movies first
these blockbuster
types what are you
looking forward to
well in the same way
that Anne and I are
both looking forward
to a Wonder Woman
because of the you
know having a new
director in the
chair patty Jenkins
instead of Zack
Snyder or some of the
other one
brothers guys
spider-man homecoming
seize that property
going back into the
Disney Marvel family
and so hopefully
they'll do a better
job with it than the
last few versions
of that hero we got
I'm also looking
forward to a couple of
films that premiered at South by
Southwest this year
they've been getting
a lot of really
positive buzz the rain
atomic blonde which
is an action film
starring Charlize
Theron coming off of
Mad Max fury road
and another driving
movie Edgar Wright's
baby driver which
got amazing reviews
and people are
really talking a lot
about that one so
I'm hoping that's
going to be something
that really adds a
little pep to the
summer for those of us who want
something less what
can I say loud or
something a little
smaller perhaps
allistic yes what
what might you what
should we look forward
to you know there
are some wonderful
smaller movies and
that's another kind
of counter to the
blockbuster strategy
is that summer is a
great time for counter
programming and
last year we saw
wonderful small movies
like love and
friendship and Captain
Fantastic and hell
or high water and I
feel like this summer
another hit from
Sundance
called the big six
which is just a
charming fact-based
romantic comedy
based on the true
love life of Kumail
Nanjiani the Pakistani
American comic
it's just a really
effecting funny sweet
very sincere very
effecting a little
movie that I think
has potential to
really become a
super hit this summer
Alonso you want to
give us one a smaller
run smaller pick
yeah I've got high
hopes for Sofia
Coppola the beguil'd
it's based on a novel that was
previously turned
into a Clint Eastwood
movie by Don Siegel
back in the 70s but
I suspect it under
coppola skies it's
going to become
more of a film about
sort of women in
containment which has
been a favorite
theme of hers and it
stars Nicole Kidman
Colin Farrell and
Kirsten Dunst and so
I'm expecting a lot
okay the all-year-round
summer movie
season Alonso der
Aldi and Ann Hornaday
thank you both very
much thank you thank
you
[Music]
now to another in our brief but
spectacular series
where we ask people
about their passions
tonight we hear
from legendary
television producer
Norman Lear who's
responsible for some
of America's most popular and
groundbreaking sitcoms
at 94 Lee shows
no sign of slowing down
this week he began
hosting a new podcast
all of the above
still here how do
people treat you as
you get older ah yes
people as I grow
older people who
consider me wiser
and that too is
[Music]
I was a kid of the
depression my dad his
brothers there they
all went belly-up
everybody was broke
the great aunts and
grandparents always
had an expression
that when somebody
was making a buck he
was a good provider
a good provider that
was a sound I heard
a lot and all I ever
wanted to be was a
good provider oh I
had seen Carroll
O'Connor in a Blake
Edwards comedy called
what did you do in
the war daddy and
I never forgot his
face he walked in and
bred I don't think
he finished a page
before I knew that
was that was Archie
Bunker I wrote those
lines he gave it
his soul the thing I
love about Archie
anita's is they both
talked a lot about
they didn't really
know what they were
talking about but
they had strong
points of view that's
what most of America
is about I love
doing plays because
they are plays in
front of a live
audience it develops a
chemistry between the
individual players
and the audience how does she
communicate to
people you see Robin
thinks words are a
waste of time so she
speaks with her eyes Oh
we'll open up wide
and let's hear the
Gettysburg Address
on the air at one
time there was all
the family and Maude
The Jeffersons good
times one day at a
time the facts of
life Mary Hartman Mary
Hartman Fernwood
tonight people used to
ask when all that
was going on you know
like you're under a
lot of stress there
was stress and there's
joyful stress the
stress I was under
was altogether joyful
it ended with 240
live people sitting in
an audience laughing
go beat that did
all that in time
to my life hi I'm
Norman Lear and
this is my brief but
spectacular take on
all the things that
maybe wind up with
the life outlet you
can watch more brief
but spectacular
videos online at
pbs.org slash Newshour
slash briefs on the
NewsHour online the
sound of the healthcare
bill passing the
House of Representatives tells a
fascinating story you
can listen to both
parties reactions in
that moment on our
web site pbs.org/newshour
and again to
our honor roll of
American service
personnel killed in Iraq in the
Afghanistan conflict
we add them as
their deaths are
made official in
photographs become
available here in
silence are three more
you
[Music]
and that's a NewsHour
for tonight on
Friday we report
from Paris on the eve
of Frances presidential
election I'm
hari Sreenivasan
join us online and
again here tomorrow
evening with mark
shields and Michael
Gerson for all of us
at the PBS Newshour
thank you see you
soon
major funding for
the PBS Newshour has
been provided by BNSF Railway
and with the ongoing
support of these
institutions
[Music]
this program was
made possible by the
Corporation for Public
Broadcasting and
by contributions
to your PBS station
from viewers like you
[Music]
said you'd favor
middle class up here
that she took me out
to those weapons I
think we're off to a great start
[Music]
you're watching PBS